Add filter patterns specifications and anatomy (#1362)
hashicorp/design-system: website/docs/patterns/filter-patterns/partials/specifications/specifications.md

**Filter pattern spacing using an in-line sidebar**

![Pattern spacing with an inline sidebar](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/pattern-anatomy-inline-sidebar-spacing.png)

## Filter bar

Filters positioned in a filter bar orientation consist of one or [Dropdowns](/components/dropdown), [Buttons](/components/button), and [Inputs](/components/form/text-input) wrapped in a [Segmented Group](/components/segmented-group). Depending on the complexity of the data set, a filter bar can consist of a single dropdown in simple use-cases, or multiple Segmented Groups in complex scenarios.

![Simple filter bar anatomy](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/filter-bar-anatomy-01.png)

| Element | Usage |
|---------|-------|
| Filter bar container | A container that spans the width of the dataset and wraps the functional filter elements (Segmented Group, Dropdowns, etc) |
| [Segmented Group](/components/segmented-group) | Wraps the Segmented Dropdown, Button, and Input to enforce a connected visual experience and group similar or related filters. |
| Segmented Input | Allows for searching and filtering within data set on string and text values |

> | Segmented Button | Allows functions to be performed on the data set, e.g., refreshing the dataset. |

Author: I've added some clarifying content in the guidelines (not on this branch) for filter (or global)-level functions

### Overflow filters

If it's necessary for filters to overflow into a [Flyout](/components/flyout), use the same organizational method and spacing guidelines as the filter sidebar.

![Filters within a Flyout](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/flyout-filter-spacing.png =450x*)

## Applied filters

![Applied filters anatomy](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/applied-filters-anatomy.png)

| Element | Usage |
|---------|-------|
| Applied Filter Container | Wraps the label and applied filters to enforce consistent spacing |
| Label | Labels the applied filters and communicates whether filters have been applied or not. |
| Filters | A list of dismissible [Tags](/components/tag) that communicate what filters have been applied to the dataset. |
| Bulk clear | Clear all applied filters with a single bulk action. Uses a small [Tertiary button](/components/button) with an icon. |

### Spacing

- In the applied filters container use a `16px` gap between elements.
- Adhere to the spacing guidelines for the [Tag](/components/tag#spacing) between multiple filters.

![Applied filters spacing](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/applied-filters-spacing.png)

### Layout

> Depending on the available space, the size of the viewport, and the number filters that have been applied, the list of applied filters may overflow to multiple lines. In this circumstance it's recommend to stack the label, filter list, and bulk clear action in a column orientation.

Author: > Just wanted to plus one the above. In the majority of cases it's advisable to include image widths (and heights ideally).

I must have missed something in the past then, I haven't been resizing images or passing a specific width to them unless they seem to break the layout or something like that. I'll make sure to do that going forward!

!!! Info

Helios does not currently publish any components that account for layout of the structural filter elements, these are currently the responsibility of the consumer. Instead, use these guidelines in a manner that best supports your application structure.

!!!

## Pattern layout

Adhering to the spacing, layout, and specifications outlined for the individual structural elements of a filter pattern makes assembling them together into a pattern relatively simple.

**Ex 1.0: Pattern anatomy with a filter bar**

![Pattern anatomy with filter bar](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/pattern-anatomy-specific-filter-bar.png)

**Ex 1.1: Pattern anatomy with a filter sidebar**

![Pattern anatomy with a sidebar](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/pattern-anatomy-specific-sidebar.png)

| Element | Usage |
|---------|-------|
| Filters | Dictates what parameters are available to filter upon and the values that correspond with them. Can either be positioned in a horizontal filter bar or a vertical filter sidebar. |

> | Applied filters | Displays the filters that are applied to the dataset and accounts for the bulk clearing of filters. |

Reviewer: Should we mention somewhere (if not already done) that these are optional? Otherwise consumers may infer that they _always_ have to add them (since most of the screenshots show them) which is not always the case.

Author: In general here I refrained from marking almost everything as either optional or required. I think what I was trying to do was imply that the decision on usage comes down to the specific application and the filtering strategy/implementation. I think I can be a bit more explicit in some cases, but I hesitate to be _too_ prescriptive.

![Sidebar anatomy](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/sidebar-anatomy.png =350x*)

| Element | Usage |
|---------|-------|
| Sidebar container | Wraps the filters or multiple groups in a vertical orientation. |
| Divider | (Optional, but recommended) Increases visual differentiation between each group. |
| [Checkbox Group](/components/form/checkbox) | Displays the values in a checkbox group, supporting the selection of multiple items. |
| [Radio Group](/components/form/radio) | Displays the values in a radio group, supporting the selection of a single value. |

### Spacing

Spacing within a filter sidebar extends the guidelines for spacing within a [form pattern](/patterns/form-patterns).

- If a divider separates the groups use a `24px` vertical gap on the top and bottom of the divider.
- If no divider is used, groups should receive a `32px` gap between them.

**Ex 3.0: Spacing in a sidebar that uses dividers**

![Sidebar spacing](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/sidebar-spacing-divider.png =350x*)

**Ex 3.1: Spacing in a sidebar that doesn't use dividers**

> ![Sidebar spacing without a divider](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/sidebar-spacing-no-divider.png =350x*)

Reviewer 2: We should be opinionated about this design decision to ensure a consistent application across products.

### Filters within a Flyout

If its necessary for filters to overflow into a [Flyout](/components/flyout), use the same organizational method and spacing guidelines as the filter sidebar.

> ![Filters within a Flyout](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/flyout-filter-spacing.png)

Reviewer: if you want you can apply a size to the images, to better fit with the others in terms of proportions of the UI elements (this is quite large)

the syntax is this:
```
![Filters within a Flyout](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/flyout-filter-spacing.png =123x456)
```

> ### Filters within a Flyout
> 
> If its necessary for filters to overflow into a [Flyout](/components/flyout), use the same organizational method and spacing guidelines as the filter sidebar.
> 
> ![Filters within a Flyout](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/flyout-filter-spacing.png)

Reviewer 2: While it has a similar structure, you don't really refer to this as a subset of the filter sidebar, so it feels weird to nest the content under a Sidebar heading. I recommend bumping it up a level. 

```suggestion
## Overflow filters

If it's necessary for filters to overflow into a [Flyout](/components/flyout), use the same organizational method and spacing guidelines as the filter sidebar.

![Filters within a Flyout](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/flyout-filter-spacing.png)
```

> ## Applied filters

Reviewer: As mentioned above, I think it would be helpful to clarify if they're always required, or they are optional.

![Applied filters anatomy](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/applied-filters-anatomy.png)

| Element | Usage |
|---------|-------|
| Applied Filter Container | Wraps the label and applied filters to enforce consistent spacing |
| Label | Labels the applied filters and communicates whether filters have been applied or not. |
| Filters | A list of dismissible [Tags](/components/tag) that communicate what filters have been applied to the dataset. |
| Bulk clear | Clear all applied filters with a single bulk action. Uses a small [Tertiary button](/components/button) with an icon. |

> ### Spacing

Reviewer: This content will be removed, if we introduce a `TagList` element, right? (in that case, these specs are already implemented by the components itself)

Reviewer 3: I'd keep this in until we publish the `TagList` – can make a note to review it at that point.

- In the applied filters container use a `16px` gap between elements.
- Adhere to the spacing guidelines for the [Tag](/components/tag#spacing) between multiple filters.

![Applied filters spacing](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/applied-filters-spacing.png)

### Empty state

If no filters are applied, indicate this to the user by changing the text in the label and optionally providing details on filtering via a [Tooltip](/components/tooltip).

![Applied filters empty state](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/applied-filters-empty-state.png)

### Layout

Depending on the available space, the size of the viewport, and the number filters that have been applied, the list of applied filters may overflow to multiple lines. In this circumstance it's recommend to stack the label, filter list, and bulk clear action in a column orientation.

![Applied filters multi-line](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/applied-filters-overflow-layout.png)

Use a `12px` gap between each row in this orientation.

![Applied filters multi-line spacing](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/applied-filters-overflow-layout-spacing.png)

## Pagination

> Refer to the [Pagination](/components/pagination) guidelines for more information on how to use Pagination in relation to a data set.

Reviewer: should this paragraph refer to the `Pagination` _specifications_, and not the _guidelines_?

Author: Yep, that's a good point, I'll update!

!!! Info

> Helios does not publish any components that account for the layout of filter elements; these are the consumer's responsibility. Instead, use these guidelines to combine Helios components and best support your application structure.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Helios does not publish any components that account for the layout of filter elements; these are the consumer’s responsibility. Instead, use these guidelines to combine Helios components and best support your application structure.
```

| Filter functions | Optional; responsible for performing global functions on the data set. |

### Spacing

Use a `16px` gap between each filter element or Segmented Group within the filter bar.

![Multiple groups in a filter bar](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/filter-bar-anatomy-spacing-01.png =643x*)

Align filter functions to the end of the container with space between the primary filters and the global functions.

![Functions within a filter bar](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/filter-bar-anatomy-spacing-02.png =874x*)

### Filter bar within a pattern

Within a filter pattern, stack the filter bar on top of the data set and applied filters with a `16px` gap between each element.

![Pattern anatomy with filter bar](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/pattern-anatomy-filter-bar-spacing.png =809x*)

## Filter sidebar anatomy

![Sidebar anatomy](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/sidebar-anatomy.png =462x*)

| Element | Usage |
|---------|-------|
| Container | Required; wraps the filter elements and occupies the height of either the page or the data set depending on the scope of the filters. |

> | Filters | Required; dictates what parameters are available to filter upon and the values that correspond with them. Can be represented by a [Checkbox group](/components/form/checkbox) or [Radio group](/components/form/radio) |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Filters | Required; dictates what parameters are available to filter upon and the corresponding values. Can be represented by a [Checkbox group](/components/form/checkbox) or [Radio group](/components/form/radio) |
```

Reviewer 4: Just a suggestion to shorten the text. Ignore if you like.

![Applied filters with a sidebar](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/pattern-anatomy-applied-filters-sidebar.png =693x*)

## Pagination

Refer to the [Pagination](/components/pagination) guidelines for details around spacing and usage of the component.

### Pagination within a pattern

Within a filter pattern, position Pagination at the bottom of the data set using a `16px` gap between elements and ensure that the Pagination spans the width of the data set.

![Pattern anatomy with filter bar](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/pattern-anatomy-pagination-spacing.png =1000x*)

## Pattern anatomy

The core anatomy of a filter pattern remains largely the same regardless of the layout or positioning method, as outlined in these generic examples.

**Vertical layout with a filter bar**

![Pattern anatomy](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/pattern-anatomy-generic-filter-bar.png =929x*)

**Layout with a filter sidebar**

![Pattern anatomy](/assets/patterns/filter-patterns/pattern-anatomy-generic-sidebar.png =929x*)

| Element | Usage |
|---------|-------|
| Filters | Required; can be represented by a filter bar or a filter sidebar. |
| Applied filters | Required |
| Data set | Required |

> | Pagination | Optional, but recommended for larger data sets. |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Pagination | Optional; but recommended for larger data sets. |
```

Reviewer 4: For consistency
